[Extracted from https://www3.nd.edu/~busiforc/handouts/Data%20and%20Stories/correlation/Brain%20Size/brainsize.html - University of Notre Dame]

Story Name: Brain Size and Intelligence

Abstract: Are the size and weight of your brain indicators of your mental
capacity? In this study by Willerman et al. (1991) the researchers use Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) to determine the brain size of the subjects. The
researchers take into account gender and body size to draw conclusions about the
connection between brain size and intelligence.

Willerman et al. (1991) conducted their study at a large southwestern university.
They selected a sample of 40 right-handed Anglo introductory psychology students
who had indicated no history of alcoholism, unconsciousness, brain damage,
epilepsy, or heart disease. These subjects were drawn from a larger pool of
introductory psychology students with total Scholastic Aptitude Test Scores
higher than 1350 or lower than 940 who had agreed to satisfy a course requirement
by allowing the administration of four subtests (Vocabulary, Similarities, Block
Design, and Picture Completion) of the Wechsler (1981) Adult Intelligence
Scale-Revised. With prior approval of the University's research review board,
students selected for MRI were required to obtain prorated full-scale IQs of
greater than 130 or less than 103, and were equally divided by sex and IQ
classification.

The MRI Scans were performed at the same facility for all 40 subjects. The scans
consisted of 18 horizontal MR images. The computer counted all pixels with
non-zero gray scale in each of the 18 images and the total count served as an
index for brain size.

A straightforward method for evaluating the relationship between brain size and
IQ scores is the correllation coefficient. For the 20 men in the study, the
researchers report correlations between IQ scores and brain sizes before and
after controlling for body size of r = 0.51 (p-value less than 0.05) and r = 0.65
(p-value less than 0.01) respectively. For the 20 women in the study, the
researchers report the corresponding correlations to be r = 0.33 (p-value not
significant) and r = 0.35 (p-value not significant). With both genders pooled the
correlation between IQ and adjusted brain size was r = 0.51 (p-value less than
0.05).

Reference: Willerman, L., Schultz, R., Rutledge, J. N., and Bigler, E. (1991),
"In Vivo Brain Size and Intelligence," Intelligence, 15, 223-228. Authorization:
Contact authors Description: Willerman et al. (1991) collected a sample of 40
right-handed Anglo introductory psychology students at a large southwestern
university. Subjects took four subtests (Vocabulary, Similarities, Block Design,
and Picture Completion) of the Wechsler (1981) Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised.
The researchers used Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) to determine the brain size
of the subjects. Information about gender and body size (height and weight) are
also included. The researchers withheld the weights of two subjects and the
height of one subject for reasons of confidentiality. Number of cases: 40
Variable Names:

	1.Gender: Male or Female
	2.FSIQ: Full Scale IQ scores based on the four Wechsler (1981) subtests
	3.VIQ: Verbal IQ scores based on the four Wechsler (1981) subtests
	4.PIQ: Performance IQ scores based on the four Wechsler (1981) subtests
	5.Weight: body weight in pounds
	6.Height: height in inches
	7.MRI_Count: total pixel Count from the 18 MRI scans

